---
layout: blog
title: OpenBSD First Impressions
author: Ben
---

After an unexpected issue arose with my SSD, I had to upgrade it over
break, which was an excuse to try out another operating system.  I had
already used a number of different GNU/Linux distros in the past
(Debian, NixOS, Devuan, Arch, CRUX, ...) so, true to the manic energy
that's essential to the art of distro-hopping, I decided that this
time I wasn't even going to install GNU/Linux.

After looking around on Wikipedia, I decided to try installing
OpenBSD.  To a ~~devoted~~ GNU/Linux user such as myself, it sounded
exciting and exotic — after all, their logo is a pufferfish, with a
human face!  How weird is that?

# Installation

Installing operating systems is fun because there's a sort of
clandestine feeling to it, as if you're hacking into the machine (not
too far from the truth) or performing a sketchy surgery.  I set up the
usual equipment (bootable USB, ethernet cable, big can of Thai tea),
put on some rock music, and got to work.

Of course, I messed up the installation quite a few times, so my
process changed gradually with each new attempt.  Before going on,
I'll note that there were only really two resources that I needed
to use for the working installation:
* [https://www.openbsdhandbook.com/installation/](https://www.openbsdhandbook.com/installation/)
* [https://www.openbsd.org/faq/faq14.html#softraidFDE](https://www.openbsd.org/faq/faq14.html#softraidFDE)


Those pages said pretty much everything, so go check them out
if you want detailed commands and all that.  I won't go into
those details in this post.

The installer is pretty bare-bones, and mostly just prompts you to
select options for wifi, mirrors, partition schemes, etc.  You can
also enter `!` to drop into a shell, which I did at the beginning, in
order to do full-disk encryption with RAID.  It took several hours to
overwrite the SSD with random data, so I ended up going to bed in the
middle of that part.

Aside from encryption, my use-case was pretty simple; I just wanted to
have OpenBSD as my "daily driver," so I needed a network connection, a
graphical environment, etc, which the installer made very easy.  One
thing that messed me up a couple times was that I wrote to the wrong
drive in various steps, so sometimes the bootable USB got screwed up
and I had to `dd` the ISO again.  But eventually, I finished
installing and proceeded to get my usual workflow set up.

## Oops

After installing lots of packages and making customizations, I copied
my backed-up data onto the new drive.  Unfortunately, I made a rookie
mistake: the backed-up data needed its permissions adjusted, and at
some point I screwed up a `chown -R` command, and ended up making my
non-root user have ownership of almost everything on the system.

As a result, basic things like `doas` and `su` got broken, and it
wasn't long before other parts of the system began to fail.  Though I
was trying to manually fix permissions, this became too much to
handle, and I had to reinstall everything, which took a few more
hours.  After that, things have been working fine, and hopefully I'll
continue to steer clear of catastrophic errors.

# Filesystems

One of the most immediate differences between OpenBSD and GNU/Linux is
that filesystems are handled differently.  OpenBSD has its own scheme
for naming partitions (usually something like `sdNX`, where `N` is a
number and `X` is a letter).  When mounting external media, the
convention seems to be that you mount the `i` partition.  As it turns
out, OpenBSD is generally pretty picky about mounting, because it
can't fully handle `ext4` or things like LUKS.

# Documentation

The quality of documentation on OpenBSD is stellar.  It was hard to
search for OpenBSD-related tutorials on the internet, and I came to
realize that most of my questions could be answered by just reading
the man pages.  The man pages are extremely well-written compared to
on GNU/Linux, where many programs aren't even fully documented.

In general, there's less software available on OpenBSD, but what is
available is quite simple to use, and cooperates well with other
programs.  Things are cleaner and more consistent than on most
GNU/Linux systems.

# Desktop

Most screenshots of OpenBSD (outside of ricing threads anyway) show a
homely, 90s-looking desktop environment.  This is indeed what's
installed by default; but since OpenBSD uses X11, it's possible to
install most of the window managers available on GNU/Linux.  I
compiled and set up `stumpwm` without too much trouble, and was able
to get my system to look exactly like it did when I was running
Devuan.

# Wifi

OpenBSD uses `ifconfig` for wifi, and drivers are available for common
types of network adapters.  I've had success connecting to public
networks as well as ones that use WPA, but WPA-EAP is difficult.
There are actually a decent number of tutorials on how to connect to
WPA-EAP networks (`wpa_supplicant` is required in addition to
`ifconfig`) and I was able to connect to one today for a brief period
of time.  However, I still haven't gotten it to work perfectly.

# Other quirky things
## `feh`

The default keybindings for `feh(1)`, an image viewer, set `d` to
delete the current image.  `d` is usually configured to display the
image's name, so this was a nasty surprise; although I just had to
edit `/etc/feh/keys` once it became apparent what was wrong.

## `doas`

A command called `doas` is used to run things as root (and as other
users).  After installation, you have to configure `doas`, otherwise
users in `wheel` won't be able to run it.  There's also `su` which
does sort of similar.

## CPU

Part of OpenBSD's ~~selling point~~ aesthetic is security.  In fact,
one of the security measures is that some type of CPU multithreading
is disabled by default; it was startling to see `htop` say that two
CPUs were offline, but that's why, apparently.  I had to use an
interesting system configuration command called `sysctl` to find and
reconfigure this setting.  Now my system is open to more
vulnerabilities, but if Theo de Raadt wants to personally fly over to
my house and beat me over the head with a 2x4, he'll have to pay a lot
of money for plane tickets.  I think I'm safe for now.

## Web browsers

Initially I used `firefox`, because the browser I used to use
(`librewolf`) doesn't have an actively maintained package for OpenBSD.
`firefox` is pretty locked down by default, for security reasons: it
can't read or write to most directories unless you change the security
configuration, and it seems to get killed after using up too many
system resources.  This prompted me to search for other browsers, and
I ended up settling on `qutebrowser` for general-purpose stuff.  I
still use `firefox` for critical things, in order to avoid website
compatibility issues, and so far it hasn't crashed or done anything
weird in several days.

# The End

OpenBSD is an interesting OS, and I'm not sure how long I'll stick
with it.  There are definitely benefits and drawbacks compared to
GNU/Linux, but it can accomplish most of the same things.  Maybe I'll
post more about it later; but for now, I'm just having fun and hoping
things don't break.
